First of all, Mr. Hale, would you tell us something
about your early life, including the names of your
parents, and if you remember them or know them, the
dates and places of their birth and death, the date
and place of your birth, the schools you attended
before you came to Texas A&M, and whatever else you
can remember about your childhood. My father and
mother, my father's name was William Brewer Hale.
And my mother was from, they were both from
Tennessee. And her name was Alice Mitchell before
she married. And the father came to Texas in 1883
and settled in Coffman County. The reason he came
to Texas, they had a smallpox back there in
Jonesboro, Tennessee, and he had an uncle living
down here. The uncle rode him and told him he'd come
and see of him until the smallpox rolled. In those
days, you know, smallpox kill you. They didn't
have much way to be treated. So he came here in 1883
and he liked it and so he stayed. In 1886 he went back
to Tennessee and married this girl Alice
Mitchell. So my mother and father then lived down
here in Kauffman County from 1886 to 1900 when he
moved out to Swisher County, Tudor, Texas. There
wasn't a railroad there then. The Litten Years
Railroad was at Canyon. And so we lived on the ranks
28 miles south of Canyon for five years. And the
railroad first came to Tudor in 1906. So I went, in
1906 then, my dad moved to town so his kids could go
to school. He had four boys and two girls.
And we were seven years old before he'd go to school
when I was a kid.
But I skipped one grade, third grade got crowded
and they sent three of us to the fourth. And I had to
be one of those three. So that would make me famous,
start school when I was six. So I got out of school. I
graduated from Tule High School in 1918. Now you
were born what year then? Born in 1900. 1900. That
would be the year your family moved to? Yeah, I was
born in May and they moved in 1901.
In December 1901 to Swish County.
Okay. And you graduated from Tulia High School in
May of 1918 and that's the only school you had gone
to in Tulia.
What factors were involved in your choice of Texas
A&M? Well the superintendent of the school told us
that they had a military program going on here and
also an educational program at A&M we could get in
both of them because we had to sign up when we're 18
years old, September the 12th, just a little while
before school started here. And he says, if we come
down here, they let us go to school and stay here
until March next year. But he says, if the war was
over before then, we'd be gaining a lot by coming
here and getting in the SATC and also going to
school. And three of us did that. It was one of the
best things that ever happened to me. I sure was
glad of it. Of course, we had a hard time that year
because of the flu. There was some regular Army
people here besides the students in those days,
and counting the regular Army boys and the
students too, there was about 80 boys died here
that fall. But I never did have the flu. You were one
of the lucky ones. Well, the lucky ones never did
have the flu, but we had to head down to the hospital
and off hours. because they didn't have enough
help. And then when the war was over, well, we just
started regular classwork in school. We was going
to school anyway, but it upset it a little bit, but
not too much. We didn't, we still graduated in
time, in four years time, just like it never had
happened. So from that September when you
enrolled until January, I believe, when they
started kind of a new school year, particularly
for those who had been away, you actually attended
regular classes. Yes. Plus, did you have to do some
additional drilling? Oh, yeah. You see, we had to
do additional drilling and trench digging
because that was a trench warfare in World War I.
And we dug a lot of trenches around here. And did a
lot of bandit practice and stuff like that. And
then had a military manual that we studied. And the
army really had a pretty good program. There's
only one thing that was about it. The officers we
had down here had only 90 days training before they
came down here. And every one of the officers named
down here began with a K. Keese, Kennedy, King, and
all that came down here from Wisconsin or
somewhere. And they didn't even know how to put us
in the mess hall to eat our meals. We'd go up to the
steps, and then they'd say, Squad 1, forward
march, and set the table, then Squad 2. Well, we had
some juniors here that were still here in school,
and they finally called on them to help them a
little bit. They didn't even know how to hold a
tree. And these juniors got him in line. They'd
been schooled here three years, see. And it worked
out all right. But if I was, although that flew and
we had a lot of misery and all, If I were going to
school at A&M again and could pick my years, I'd
pick 18 to 22, just like I had before. You mentioned
the SATC. Students Army Training Corps.
Otherwise known as Stay Around Till Christmas.
Yeah, or Safe at the College. I've not heard Safe at
the College before. You haven't heard that one?
No, no. Dr. Hedges told me that one. Oh, is that,
those are kind of... Kind of like Aggie Jokes.
Aggie Jokes are, I'm trying to think of the word,
names that the students would use. Oh, yeah.
Students give everybody a name.
You indicated earlier about, say, at the time you
graduated from high school, when you reached your
18th year, you had to sign up. I had to sign up
September the 12th. That is, that everybody who
was 18 or more had to register for the draft. That
was the first draft that we'd had in a long time. I
know the North had a draft during the Civil War,
which was not very popular. By that date,
everybody who was 18 had to sign up. That's right,
by September the 12th.
Had you had any prior knowledge to what life was
like at A&M before you came here? Well, my mother
tried to get me not to come here. She wanted me to go
to Baylor. And I don't know where she got all this
information, but she said they had mosquitoes
down here and malaria and said the boys beat on you
all the time and just a whole lot of stuff like that.
And so the more she talked, the more I kind of wanted
to come down here. I told her, I said, now, Mom,
They've been telling the boys to graduate down
there. And I said, if they could graduate down
there, I can too. And I talked her into it, and I came
on down here. And she was later glad I came. But she
didn't want me to come down here. But I went into the
2D high school, had a little library, not very big,
but long about that time, about 1918, I guess 1917,
they put out a little brochure or something here
entitled 60 Facts About A&M College of Texas. And
you may have it over there in the archives. Yeah, I
have some of those. But I give mine to old Pink
Bounds. And I thought maybe he put it in the
archives. I think he did. 60 Facts About A&M
College of Texas. And it had a picture of a Hereford
cow with a halter on it. I'd never seen one of those
with a halter on it. We just had range cows out
there. And I kept reading those facts, and they
were wonderful, I'll tell you. I just saw a state
highway engineer was from A&M, and an electrical
engineer who helped eliminate the Panama Canal,
and you never saw so many things in there. And then
in 1913, the sergeant and team from A&M won the
contest at International in Chicago, and just
things like that, you know. and what the graduates
had done and all. So that impressed me very much. I
believe that that would still impress high school
students if you get out something like that and
send these kids to the library. I don't know where
it would not. Of course, when I was in 1918, that's a
long time ago. Kids are a little different now than
they was then. Well, I think they had some very
elaborate brochures with colored pictures in
them that they send out to the high school students
nowadays.
What were your first reactions to the school when
you arrived? Well, the first day I spent at A&M was
in the rotunda of the, I guess, what do they call
that building on the Dome right now? Academic
building. Academic building, on a cot. It didn't
have the assignments to dormitories and things
like that. And so I spent my first night on a cot in
that
rotunda of that building. And when I got up the next
morning, they had A&M students, most of them were
juniors, assigned heard these boys around and the
various things that they had to do. And the first
thing we did, of course, was go to breakfast. And I
looked at that piece of hull, and I thought that was
the biggest thing I ever saw. And my roommate, his
daddy was a rancher. And when we got to the front
door, my roommate says, look at that thing. And it
was big dust. We were from a little old town, too. He
said, wouldn't this hold a lot of hay?
But I was really, really impressed with A&M
College and we thought we had a lot of good
buildings in, but man, now, I've been around here
so long now, I'm a stranger in my own hometown. But
we had, God Hall was completed that year and Bazell
Hall was completed that year and I think Francis
Hall was completed that year and So we thought Gown
Hall was just out of this world in those days. And
Brazil Hall, I lived in there three years,
sophomore, junior, and senior. I lived in Leggett
and Milner the first two years. But there were a lot
of bedbugs here then and there. Man alive, you'd
come in here after Christmas and turn on your
light, and those bedbugs would be climbing all
over everywhere. They'd give you a hard time at
night? Yeah, man, they did. What did you do to it?
Well,
as soon as we'd report the bed bugs, well, they'd
get the sulfur out and treat them, you know. And one
time they sent us all to another dormitory, fish,
sent us down to Brazel Hall so they could burn that
sulfur down there. And that, I guess, got rid of a
lot of them. Then they'd put these mattresses in a
room and treat them, you know. But I liked A&M from
the day I came and the day I left. It just suited me
fine. Well, you mentioned earlier your mother
didn't want you to go because of the story she had
heard about hazing. I don't know where she heard
all that. Did you encounter any? I didn't hear any
of that. You hadn't heard any? I hadn't heard any of
that. And it wouldn't have made much difference
because I had three brothers older than I. And...
They hate me all the time anyway. And for example,
and they taught me a lot of things that hit me out
down here. Like, well, my youngest brother was
five years older than I was. When I was about 12, he
was 17, and I got me a secondhand little bicycle.
And they were playing down there about a block from
where we lived, he and his buddies. And I went down
there on my bicycle. Well, they didn't want me
around because I was too young for them. So they
asked me if I'd, they bragged on my bicycle and then
asked me if I'd run them an errand. And I said, yeah.
And they sent me down to the hardware store to get a
can of wrinkles and a half a dozen knot holes.
So I got on the bicycle and I went down there.
Luckily, the owner of the outfit, Mr. Cancel, came
out there about the time my dad did, and they were
good friends, and they knew me ever since I was a
baby. And he put his arm around my shoulder and
said, well, I know what I wanted, and I told him I
wanted a can of wrinkles and a half-dozen autos. He
knew what, he said, who sent you down here? And I
told him, he said, you tell those boys to come down
here themselves and get that. He saved me, because
he's supposed to send me to the next store, you
know. So that kind of stuff was going on down here,
you know. Like they'd send you to Reveille, Fluid,
and all that kind of stuff. Sell you a ticket to take
a bath and stuff like that you didn't need. Sell you
a radiator to heat your room with. So I just got
right into that stuff. I'd been trained a whole lot
by my older brothers. So the upperclassmen were
the ones who would try to sell the fish a ticket to
take a bath and a radiator for the room and that sort
of stuff. Yeah. Were they very successful with
some of the other boys? Well, yes. And one of the
main ones was to pick out some old fish that looked
gullible and then promote it to first sergeant and
pin it and stuff. And that fish, he took that
seriously. He tried to tell these other fish
softboard what to do and all that kind of stuff.
They had a lot of fun out of those kind
of boys. Somebody told me about a student who was a
fish that was really trying hard in the military
and I forget what position they promoted him to but
they told him that he was in charge of inspecting
all the vehicles that came on campus on Sunday to
see if they were carrying any alcohol. And he
stopped Dr. Brazell. Oh, he did? And some visiting
dignitary and inspected the car. Isn't that
something?
That's really good. No, I sure did like him. Of
course, everybody was in the cadet corps then, and
roomed in the dormitories, and the athletes
roomed right with them. They didn't have any
athletic dormitory or anything like that. And I
know when I was a senior, I was a major of the 1st
Battalion Infantry. And I had several football
players in the company. I had two companies, A
company and B company. And Bob Carruthers, who was
an outstanding football player, and Peony
Wilson. And those were in there. And I remember one
time, we had to have inspections, and old Peony
didn't have his. the shirt, the emblem on his shirt
that he's supposed to have. And the sergeant major
was taking down these things and he'd get the
marriage written. And I said, told him what the
thing was. He said, you mean you're gonna give him
the marriage, Peter Williams? You know, he was out
signing football players. I said, sure. I said,
Peter wouldn't like this if we didn't give him the
marriage. So the world couldn't hear me. And Puny
later thanked me for that. He says the other kid,
they would have forgiven him if he'd got by that.
But we the football players right there in the
company with you, you know. Well, they did have
different training tables where they had their
own training diets and stuff like that. But
outside of that, they slept in the dormitories
with you. and the drill and all that kind of stuff. I
presume during football season they might miss a
drill now and then. Oh yeah, they relied on it then,
yeah. But we had a class of 19, my fish year, those
four years were really, we were very fortunate as
far as that is concerned because in 1919 we won the
Southwest Conference and wasn't even scored on
and made 276 points to nothing. And we also won the
basketball championship along that 19, 19, 20,
and 21. And in 1921, we won another Southwest
Conference championship. And on January the 1st,
22, played the Praying Colonels up there at Dallas
Fire and won that game. And old Peter Wilson, he
made the first score. He recovered a fumble or
something behind the goal line and made two
points. But we really had some good athletes,
successes in their athletic program when I was
here. I believe the 17 team was the football team.
17, yeah, but I wasn't here. Yeah, it was also
unscored on. It was, yeah. And the 19 was unscored.
Yeah, they made 270 points in 1917. Mm-hmm. 19, 19,
276. In 19, 19-2, our international livestock,
that team won at Chicago. Mm-hmm. So we had pretty
good four years. Yeah, yeah. And now that 22 class
really had some wonderful boys in it. Well, we've
got three buildings on the campus named after 22
graduates. The petroleum building there, Old
Music Daugherty, and Zachary Engineering
Building, he's a 22 man. Tom Harrington, 22 man. So
we've got three out of the 22 class. We've got a
building named after Peter. Yeah, I've been
working with the Mr. Crawford in mechanical
engineering. And he keeps referring to, well, I
think particularly 22 and 32 as banner classes.
So many in each of those two classes that have
really attained prominence. They were really
prominent classes. 42, I guess. They were real
good boys. Well, that's the war class. So many of
them, I guess, were killed. Yes. Well, if you go
backwards from 22, the 12th class had some- Oh
yeah, Dutch Horn was in class of 12. His boy married
our eldest daughter.
Dutch Horn, he was a character. I've read portions
of his book, The Dutchman on the Brazos. He's the
one who started selling these tickets to these
fish that come off the train down there for 10 cents
to take a bath. Didn't have to buy them, but they
didn't know this. Now Dutch was captain of the
football team and baseball team. The tickets to
take a bath would have been for the gnat, I take it.
Yeah, that's right.
What was life like in the dormitory? I don't
believe you've ever... Well, the dormitory life
was designed to help the kids so they could study.
In other words, they had to call the quarters. I
forget what it was, about 7, 7.30, 7.30. And
everything had to be quiet because the post had
guards in it. And I guess that's one reason they
built these dormitories like Leggett and Milner
because you'd walk all around and they'd inspect
every room on every floor and they had in the
military they posted the guard and somebody had to
walk post once a term and they'd put you on one of
these floors and you'd go around and your job was to
open the door at 7.30 and ask alright and if they say
alright that means nobody's visiting and
everybody's there and ought to be there and all
that stuff And everything was quiet and you could
study. And then at 10.30, I believe, or 10.45,
they'd give you 15 minutes to get ready to go to bed
and blow another bugle. They used to blow the bugle
down here. And one of the blue taps was 11 o'clock,
and he was supposed to be in bed. And then that old
boy would expect again, you see. Opened the door
and said, Say, all right, your light's supposed to
be out, except for seniors. I think seniors get to
leave their light on. What about at other times
during the day? You know, there was no guard mount
then. No, well, they had an altar of the day. But
that's all. Well, of course, we had regular army
sergeants. We had artillery and we had...
Calvary, and we had Air Corps, and we had Signal
Corps. We had a lot of division of the Army here
then, and it took a lot of regular Army sergeants
around here. We had quite a few of them. They'd been
in the Army, some of them fought down there in
Mexico in 1915, along with old Funston and
Pershing and a bunch of guys. And so we had some real
good sergeants here that During the war, they
boarded the captain and they had to deal with the
mess. Were they the ones who did the inspections of
the rooms? No, the inspection of the rooms was done
by students. Now, we had to get up and have
calisthenics before breakfast when we were going
school here. And then, while we were our records
went to classes while some of the military people
inspected our rooms. And we were supposed to have
our beds made, we were supposed to have our shoes
shined and all that. We kept rifles in our room in
those days. And we were supposed to have those
rifles cleaned and everything in place. The rooms
were really nice in those days. Did you ever use the
rifles on the rifle range or anything like that or
were they just primarily for carrying around? We
did have range practice, yeah. But they were
primarily just for parades. Where was the rifle
range? It was way back over in there, close to that
fish, old fish tank. I don't know what they call it
now. Back over there where that Fire School is
somewhere in that area. Uh-huh. Well, it would be
then across the bypass. Yes. Then behind there,
east, on the other side of Eastwood Airport. Yeah.
Now, we had an interurban from here to Bryan. They
called it a lot of names. I don't know what it was.
Jumping Jelly or something. Tunerville Trolley.
Tunerville Trolley and... We had no place to go.
There wasn't no such thing as going home on the
weekend in those days. And I never saw a boy get out
on the highway and tell me he was riding when I was in
school here. That started later.
You mentioned the interurban to Bryan. How
frequently could you go to Bryan? Well, you'd have
to get a pass to go to Bryan. And if you wasn't a
campus, you'd go nearly any time you want to if you
get a pass. But there wasn't anything to go to
except pick show. And we'd do that sometimes. And
then when you got to be a senior, if you were a
captain or higher, The picture show down there
would give you a pass to the show all year long. And
so that was one thing they did for us over in Bryan.
How much did it cost you to ride the trolley to
Bryan? 10 cents. 10 cents.
Let's see. We've talked a little bit about the mess
hall. And you mentioned that your roommate, who
was also West Texas thought it would hold a lot of
hay.
I had to agree with you on that. Yeah, it'd hold even
more today. What was the food like there? Well, we
thought it was good. Now, every now and then you'd
hear a lot of complaints. And Dr. Brazell was
president. He was president of the CIA before he
came down here. Of course, some of these guys at the
CIA don't like to be called that anymore. makes
some of them mad. Texas University for Women, I
believe, what they call it now. Anyway, Dr. Zell
was fed up there and he came down here in 1914. And
he'd hear these complaints about food and so one
time he had us all down there in Guyon Hall and those
days he'd put everybody in Guyon Hall. And he had
mentioned that and he said now, you ought to check
up a little bit on that and see if you don't weigh
more than that. And you did when you came down here,
and usually you would, you know. But I thought they
fed us pretty good. And they put a pitcher of milk
that big on everything. If you wanted milk, just
pour you a glass full, and if you run out, pour
another one. And you had enough to eat.
Some of them might not have liked it, but I thought
it was good. They had pancakes and eggs and bacon
for breakfast. and syrup and stuff like that, and
they had cereal. I don't see how they could beat
that. And sometimes they passed out apples and you
could take them home with you or back to your
dormitory.
Yeah, some complaints, but I thought it was pretty
good. Well, I imagine there will always be some
people who would complain no matter what you feel.
Yeah. But what did the... We had to learn all these
names, us fish did, you know. Uh-huh. You mean the
special names for the food? Yeah. If you didn't ask
for it by the right name, you didn't get anything.
That's right. They call molasses a regulator.
Coffee dope.
I guess that's because of the drug it has in it.
Mm-hmm. Caffeine. Caffeine.
Uh-huh. Uh-huh. They named them pretty good. Yes.
Pepper was black. It was dirt. Dirt. Sugar.
Sand, I believe. No, salt was sand, I believe. I
forget what sugar was.
Bread was gunwale. Pie was cush. We never got much.
That's one thing that softball would take away
from us sometimes, particularly if it catches us
doing something we ought to be, we shouldn't be
doing. And then they'd really take the coach away
from us for a week. Well, it was all kind of home
style. Oh, yeah. Family style. You see, each
company would be assigned a table, you know, and
the same table every time. So when they march you up
the steps and turn you loose, you know where to go.
And you'd get all the food you wanted to eat. They
never did. Did the upperclassmen ever play any,
well, I'll say play games about the food other than
taking away your kush? Well, once in a while you'd
hear something like that where they'd add
something to it, like I'd put some vinegar on
something to make it taste pretty good or
something like that, but not very often. One, I've
heard mention of occasional prune races in the
mess hall. Did you ever experience any of those?
No, I didn't. No? Okay. I think some of those
things...